HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: After
a contentious
debate, the nation's top
Republican won't
defend Donald Trump, focusing
instead on trying
to keep control of the U.S.
House.
Also ahead this Monday:
Hurricane Matthew
leaves a path of destruction
throughout the
nation's Southeast, as dangerous
flooding
continues to threaten North
Carolina.
And Ruth Bader Ginsburg in her
own words.
We sit down with the Supreme
Court justice
to talk about her new book and
breaking boundaries.
RUTH BADER GINSBURG, Associate
Justice, U.S.
Supreme Court: When I graduated
from law school
in 1959, there wasn't a single
woman on any
federal bench.
It wouldn't be a realistic
ambition.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Twenty-nine
days to go until
the election, it's the day after
debate number
two, and Donald Trump is
scrambling to save
his presidential bid.
But the fallout from his lewd
remarks about
women cost him again today.
Lisa Desjardins reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: He is the
highest-ranking
Republican in the nation, and,
today, House
Speaker Paul Ryan drew a hard
line with his
party's nominee.
He won't defend Donald Trump,
and won't campaign
for him either.
A spokeswoman for Ryan told the
"NewsHour":
"The speaker is going to spend
the next month
focused entirely on protecting
our congressional
majorities."
But Ryan is still on the record
endorsing
Trump.
About that, his spokeswoman
said: "There is
no update in his position" --
all this three
days after The Washington Post
posted video
of Trump in 2005 using lewd
language and bragging
about making unwanted sexual
advances on women.
In last night's debate, Trump
again apologized
for the remarks, but mainly
argued that his
words were simple bravado.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
This was locker room talk.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today, Trump
took to Twitter
to lash out at the speaker.
He wrote: "Paul Ryan should
spend more time
on balancing the budget, jobs
and illegal
immigration and not waste his
time on fighting
the Republican nominee."
Meanwhile, Trump today was
sending a different
kind of signal to Pennsylvania
voters, waving
the Pittsburgh Steelers'
terrible towel and
talking of humility.
DONALD TRUMP: I'm not proud of
everything
that I have done in life.
I mean, who among us is?
Is anybody totally proud of
every single element?
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile, for
Democrat Hillary
Clinton, the day after the
debate was occasion
to kick off a two-day,
three-college swing.
She was back on the attack, this
afternoon
at Wayne State University in
Detroit.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I believe that every single one
of us in this
room today has paid more in
federal income
taxes than Donald Trump has.
LISA DESJARDINS: As Clinton
embarks on her
post-debate push, a new NBC
News/Wall Street
Journal poll conducted after the
Trump videotape
appeared showed she is widening
her lead over
Trump, with 46 percent in a
four-way race
to Trump's 35 percent.
Libertarian Gary Johnson and the
Green Party's
Jill Stein are in the single
digits.
Now, that poll was conducted
before a national
TV audience of around 60 million
people watched
the second Clinton-Trump debate
last night.
And a few moments have cascaded
into questions
today.
DONALD TRUMP: He and I haven't
spoken, and
I disagree.
LISA DESJARDINS: That was Trump
disagreeing
with a stance on Syria that
moderator Martha
Raddatz attributed to his
running mate, Mike
Pence, that the U.S. should be
ready to use
force against Russian ally and
Syrian leader
Bashar al-Assad.
Pence's actual words from the
V.P. debate
added a qualifier:
GOV.
MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
And if Russia chooses to be
involved and continue,
I should say, to be involved in
this barbaric
attack on civilians in Aleppo,
the United
States of America should be
prepared to use
military force.
LISA DESJARDINS: On CNN this
morning, Pence
stressed again he was speaking
about using
force if Russia attacks
civilians in Aleppo.
That's still a difference with
Trump, but
it's a narrower one than was
portrayed in
the debate.
And there was one other moment,
on investigating
Hillary Clinton's e-mails:
DONALD TRUMP: If I win, I am
going to instruct
my attorney general to get a
special prosecutor
to look into your situation,
because there
has never been so many lies, so
much deception.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Clinton
campaign decried
those remarks as using power to
target political
opponents, but, this morning,
Trump campaign
manager Kellyanne Conway
indicated her boss'
words were sarcastic.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Campaign
Manager:
That was a quip.
And I saw in NBC's own reporting
it was referred
it a quip, so I will go with NBC
on it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Conway went on
to say that
Trump was venting the
frustrations of his
voters.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will take a
closer look
at the campaign, and divisions
within Republican
ranks, right after the news
summary.
In the day's other news: The
desperation of
Aleppo, Syria, prompted Doctors
Without Borders
to appeal for access, amid a
Russian-Syrian
assault on the city.
The group supports eight
hospitals there,
but has only 35 doctors to help
275,000 civilians.
It says the wounded are sleeping
outside,
waiting for care.
Meanwhile, Russia announced it
is creating
a permanent naval base in Syria
to increase
its military presence in the
region.
The wind and rain have subsided,
but the damage
that Hurricane Matthew did is
far from over.
As of today, the storm is blamed
for hundreds
of deaths in Haiti, plus at
least 22 more
in the U.S. Flooding extends
across five states,
with North Carolina hit the
hardest.
Whole towns awash in water, the
legacy of
a long, stormy weekend across
Eastern North
Carolina.
ALISHA BROOKS, North Carolina: I
don't have
nothing left.
Nothing.
I have to take all this and put
it in the
garbage.
I just want somewhere else to
go.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's the worst
the state
has seen since Hurricane Floyd
in 1999, and
Governor Pat McCrory warned
today, it will
not end soon.
GOV.
PAT MCCRORY (R), North Carolina:
The greatest
threat at this point in time
remains inland
flooding that will continue
throughout this
week in both Central and Eastern
North Carolina.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Matthew dumped
a foot or
more of rain more than 100 miles
inland in
Fayetteville, and eight inches
in Raleigh,
the state capital.
In Lumberton, just south of
Fayetteville,
rescuers worked to evacuate
1,500 people after
a levee along the Lumber River
broke overnight.
The deluge also triggered scores
of rescue
missions Saturday night and
Sunday, with emergency
crews from as far away as New
York taking
part.
WOMAN: All us had to pitch
together and help
people get out of their
apartments, get our
stuff out, and crawl through
water all night
long, babies, all children all
stuck in the
water.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Nearly a
million homes and
businesses in the Carolinas were
still in
the dark today, plus thousands
more in Georgia
and Virginia.
Parts of Interstate 95 were
flooded in several
places in North Carolina,
halting traffic
on a major north-south artery.
A number of roads and bridges
remained closed
in South Carolina as well, and
2,000 people
were still in shelters.
Meanwhile, cleanup began
elsewhere in Savannah,
Georgia, where 17 inches of rain
fell and
in Florida, where Governor Rick
Scott surveyed
coastal erosion today.
GOV.
RICK SCOTT (R), Florida: We were
actually
blessed that this storm never
turned in and
had a direct hit.
While we don't want to see the
devastation
we have seen behind us at all,
the most important
thing is to save everybody's
life.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The hurricane
did score
a direct hit on Haiti,
destroying whole towns.
Estimates of the dead there
range from 500
to 1,000, with a new outbreak of
cholera compounding
the crisis.
The United Nations called today
for a massive
response to get food, water and
shelter to
at least 750,000 Haitians.
We will look at what the
hurricane did to
the nation's oldest city later
in the program.
Samsung faced a new debacle
today after reports
that replacement Galaxy Note 7
phones are
overheating and catching fire,
just like the
originals.
The company said it is
temporarily adjusting
production schedules.
It didn't confirm reports that
it halted production
entirely.
Samsung recalled the original
batch of 2.5
million Note 7s last month over
the fire issue.
Two Boston area professors will
share this
year's Nobel Prize for
economics.
Oliver Hart of Harvard
University and Bengt
Holmstrom of Massachusetts
Institute of Technology
were honored today for their
work in contract
theory.
In Stockholm today, the Nobel
Committee said
they have shed light on
everything from paying
executives to privatizing
prisons.
PER STROMBERG, Chairman,
Committee for the
Prize in Economic Sciences:
Thanks to their
research, we now have -- can
analyze not just
financial terms, who should get
paid what,
but also the control and
decision rights,
ownership, property rights and
other types
of decision rights and
contracts.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Hart was born
in Britain
and has taught at Harvard since
1993.
Holmstrom is from Finland.
On Wall Street today, stocks
rose as the price
of oil topped $51 a barrel, the
highest in
a year.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 88
points to close at 18329.
The Nasdaq rose 36 points, and
the S&P 500
added nearly 10.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the GOP divide
after last night's fiery
presidential debate;
in Florida, what Hurricane
Matthew has left
in its wake; Justice Ruth Bader
Ginsburg's
newest book, "My Own Words": and
much more.
We return to the race for the
White House,
with Election Day now four weeks
away.
John Yang looks at the growing
split within
the Republican Party.
JOHN YANG: With the mass
defection of high-profile
Republicans from their
presidential nominee,
has the divide between Donald
Trump and the
GOP establishment become
irreconcilable?
We explore that question now
with Tom Davis,
a former member of Congress who
was in charge
of electing Republicans to the
House, and
Barry Bennett, a Donald Trump
supporter and
former campaign senior adviser.
Gentlemen, thank you both for
joining us.
Mr. Davis, let me start with
you.
The House speaker this morning
said he's not
going to defend Donald Trump,
he's not going
to campaign with him, he's going
to focus
on the House and Senate.
Is he saying that he thinks the
presidential
race is over?
TOM DAVIS (R), Former U.S.
Congressman: No,
I think he's saying he wants to
make sure
the House Republicans get
reelected and he
has a working majority.
This isn't different than what
he was telling
the House a month ago, which is,
you have
to look after your own district.
Donald Trump is going to help
candidates in
some districts.
In some districts, he's going to
a liability
and candidates are going to have
to do what
they have to do.
But his number one
responsibility isn't to
elect a president.
It's to reelect the House
members.
And when I was campaign chairman
in 2000,
it was actually a similar
arrangement with
George W. Bush, where they went
out and did
their thing and we did out
things.
We coordinated to some extent,
but it was
up to each individual member in
terms of how
they were going to handle it.
JOHN YANG: But, Mr. Bennett,
with all these
Republicans, with so many
Republicans over
the weekend who -- many of them
in tough races,
many of them running for
reelection, saying
that they are no longer
supporting Donald
Trump, is that the smart move?
BARRY BENNETT, Former Trump
Campaign Senior
Adviser: Well, the smart move is
to recognize
that the issues that he's
talking about and
how people are reacting to them
and talk about
those issues.
You know, if this were an
election on personality,
Donald Trump would be down by
100 points.
I mean, Hillary has spent $200
million pointing
out his perfectly obvious
imperfections.
But the issues that he talks
about are why
people rally around him.
So, I think it would be smart
for all candidates
to think about those issues.
JOHN YANG: We have had -- let's
stay with
you.
We have had Donald Trump
tweeting out that
maybe Paul Ryan should be
focusing on balancing
the budget, creating jobs and
immigration
and not fighting with him, that
Kellyanne
Conway this morning talked about
inappropriate
behavior by some of the
Republicans who are
now turning against him.
Are we lining up with this sort
of one wing
of the party vs. another wing of
the party?
BARRY BENNETT: I hope not.
I hope we're lining up with
people who are
in real pain across America.
That's what we should be talking
about.
That's all Mr. Trump should be
talking about.
There are people out there that
haven't had
a real increase in real wages in
a really
long time.
That's what he should be talking
about.
I don't care what Paul Ryan
does.
Paul Ryan's duty, as Tom's was,
is to help
elect members to the House.
Tom was very good at it.
And Speaker Ryan needs to raise
a lot of money
to those done.
But they don't need to be
talking about each
other.
REP.
TOM DAVIS: John, I don't think
there is any
question, though, that the Trump
constituency
that came in, to some extent,
was anti-establishment,
and that means
anti-congressional
establishment.
There is some tension there.
The question is, can they
coexist and get
along and maximize both their
outputs to produce
a Republican Congress and
perhaps elect a
Republican president?
And, of course, there are
tensions there.
JOHN YANG: What is the answer to
that question?
Can they get along and how can
they get along?
REP.
TOM DAVIS: Well, I think members
-- it just
depends.
In some districts, you have
members endorsing
Trump, running with Trump,
coming to his Trump
rallies.
In other districts, you won't be
able to find
them with a search if Trump
comes to town.
It really depends.
And we have always had to run
our own races.
I have found, in my district out
here in Northern
Virginia, after a couple of
terms, there were
very few Republicans I could
really appear
with without hurting myself.
You were trying to be a team
player, but,
first of all, you owe yourself
and the caucus
a duty to get reelected.
And Donald Trump performs very
well in some
districts, and in some
districts, he's not.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Bennett, over the
weekend,
we saw Paul Ryan actually get
booed when he
talked about the situation, the
videotape,
and that Trump wasn't with him,
as he was
scheduled to be.
When Joe Heck in Nevada, a
Senate candidate,
withdrew his endorsement of Mr.
Trump, he
got booed.
Is there a risk for candidates
who are jumping
off the Trump bandwagon?
BARRY BENNETT: Yes.
I mean, no one's ever
successfully sawed a
boat in half and floated to
safety.
Once we're in the boat, we're in
the boat.
We need the presidential race --
if not it's
winnable, we need it to be very
close in order
for those House and Senate races
like Joe
Heck to get across the line.
So, you have got to be very
careful.
You can have your own opinions,
but realize
that 40 or 50 or 60 percent of
your supporters
are still with him.
So don't go too far.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Davis, if you
were running
the Congressional Campaign
Committee now,
what would you be telling
challengers, what
would be your members who are
running for
reelection?
REP.
TOM DAVIS: Well, it's district
by district.
But I think you look at the top
of the ticket.
If it helps you, you want to try
to latch
onto those coattails and ride
across the line.
If the wind is coming at you,
you are going
to have to basically personalize
the district,
carve your own identity, make
this a referendum
on you.
By the way, the NRCC has been
pretty successful.
John Katko's district up in
Syracuse, he's
running double digits ahead, and
Mr. Trump
is running double digits behind.
Everybody understands this.
Professionals understand you do
what you have
to do to get reelected at this
point.
Mr. Trump's remarks, nobody's
going to attach
themselves to those remarks.
You won't find anybody coming
forward.
But that doesn't necessarily
mean you abandon
ship, because, once you divide
yourself up,
I have seen very few cases where
parties survive
that kind of thing.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Bennett, no
matter what happens
at the top of the ticket in
November, this
anti-establishment feeling that
you have been
talking about is going to be
there.
It's going to continue and it's
going to exist.
What does the Republican Party
look like moving
forward?
What does it do moving forward,
win or lose?
Because even if Donald Trump is
elected president,
he will have to deal with this
Congress that
is the establishment that so
many of his supporters
hate right now.
BARRY BENNETT: Well, I think the
Freedom Caucus
probably gets larger.
I think that there's going to be
more turmoil.
But I think that if we think the
scary stuff
is over now, wait until after
the election,
because the winner is probably
only going
to get 46, 47 percent of the
vote, so more
people will have not voted for
them than voted
for them.
And the next four years in
Washington, I don't
predict calm seas.
JOHN YANG: What would you do,
Mr. Davis, if
you were running a party and, if
you were
the RNC chairman?
How would you move forward after
the election,
no matter who wins?
REP.
TOM DAVIS: Well, look, we have
got to learn
how to coexist.
What the Republicans have found
in my state
of Virginia is, even when
they're united,
given the Democratic shifts, we
lose sometimes.
So, you are going to have to
learn to coexist,
everybody get a piece of things
and try to
line up accordingly.
We're going to primaries,
instead of conventions.
I think that's a good thing in
this state.
And it shouldn't jeopardize the
Trump supporters
either, who won primaries.
But it's the kind of thing where
we are going
to have to learn to coexist.
Politics is parties are
coalitions.
And coalitions mean sometimes
you get in a
room with people you're not
quite comfortable
with to advance your own
interests.
And the Republicans have not
gotten comfortable
with their coalition.
Democrats, which are also a
diverse coalition,
have learned to coexist and win.
JOHN YANG: Tom Davis, Barry
Bennett, thanks
so much for coming in and
discussing these
interesting days with us.
REP.
TOM DAVIS: Thank you.
BARRY BENNETT: Thanks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That brings us
to our Politics
Monday duo, Amy Walter of The
Cook Political
Report and Tamara Keith of NPR,
joining us
tonight from Detroit.
So, Amy, let's start with this
evaporation
of support from some Republican
leadership.
Does it matter?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Oh,
it absolutely matters.
If you think back to the 2012
election, Mitt
Romney, of course, lost the
campaign.
He lost while getting 93 percent
of the Republican
vote.
Getting less than 90 percent is
a big problem
in a country that is as
polarized as this.
And so even if it's only 5 or 10
percent of
voters, not necessarily who even
just go out
and vote for Hillary Clinton,
but the bigger
concern, I think, for
Republicans down ballot
is that traditional Republican
voters stay
home.
They find themselves so
disgusted by this
race, they can't support Donald
Trump, they
don't like Hillary Clinton, and
so they sit
on their hands, they don't turn
out.
That is a bigger problem, I
think, for down-ballot
races than almost anything else.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tamara, what
does it mean
when the man, Paul Ryan, two
heartbeats away
from the president, the leader
of the House,
says that he's not necessarily
unendorsing
Donald Trump, but he's not
backing him, he's
not going to spend more effort?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: He's
in absolutely a tough position.
And he's been in a tough
position, and really
the Trump candidacy has put a
ton of Republicans
in very tough positions.
From the Democratic perspective,
the Clinton
campaign today responding to
Paul Ryan, basically
said, Paul Ryan, you enabled
Donald Trump
for months throughout the summer
and before
that.
And they are intent on not
letting congressional
Republicans, including those
ones who are
unendorsing, get away with
trying to distance
themselves from Donald Trump.
And I think we're very close to
this point
in a campaign where potentially
you are going
to have congressional
candidates, Republican
congressional candidates
running, saying,
let's assume Hillary Clinton is
going to be
president, reelect me or elect
me so that
we can have a Republican Senate
and a Republican
House to serve as a
counterbalance to the
person they assume will be the
president of
the United States.
And that is a pretty remarkable
moment.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that
happened during
the Clinton...
AMY WALTER: During the '96...
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right.
AMY WALTER: Right, during the
'96 campaign,
there was concerted effort by
the House and
Senate campaign committees to
basically concede
the presidential race and say,
vote for Republican
candidate X to make sure that
Clinton, then
Bill Clinton, doesn't get a
blank check.
And this has been happening
throughout the
campaign, Hari.
We have seen the Republican
Party divided,
come back together, divide, come
back together.
And we are now only 30 days from
the election,
and so the question is, does it
come back
together like it always does, or
are we going
to see it continue to be
divided, dispirited
and essentially you are going to
have this
big enthusiasm gap between those
who are going
to go out and support Hillary
Clinton and
those who are going to split the
Republicans?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tamara, late
in the afternoon,
we had the RNC come out and say:
We are still
behind our candidate.
Is this sort of continued cause
to believe
about this rift inside the
Republican Party,
almost a civil war, intentions
on who is supporting
who to be a true Republican?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, and there
had been rumors
over the weekend that Reince
Priebus was trying
to tamp down that the RNC was
cutting bait
and was going to pull its
support from Donald
Trump, financial support or
campaign support.
And with this, Priebus is
essentially saying,
no, we're in it for our
candidate.
Priebus is in another tough
position.
You have a large portion of the
Republican
base.
Yes, there are people who are
Republicans
who say that they can't vote for
Donald Trump,
but there are a lot of people
who voted for
Donald Trump in the primaries
who are passionate
about his candidacy and do not
want establishment
Republicans or Beltway
Republicans to tell
them that they can't have their
candidate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Amy, so, where
do voters fall on this divide
inside the Republican
Party?
AMY WALTER: Yes.
So, we have had some polling
come out in the
wake of the videotape that came
out over the
weekend.
And the question was asked --
The Wall Street
Journal poll asked voters who
are supporting
Donald Trump, do you think that
this is enough
for the Republican Party to
distance themselves,
to ask him to step down, maybe
to repudiate
him?
Sixty-seven percent of
Republicans said, don't
do anything, right, Donald Trump
is in the
right, the party has no right to
basically
do any of those things.
Sixty-seven percent is a big
number.
As Tam pointed out, that is not
a group of
voters you want to alienate.
At the same time, that means
that there is
another pretty sizable group of
Republicans
right now, or at least people
who would support
Donald Trump, who say, I don't
know that I
can continue to have him at the
top of ticket.
And that is a very, very
difficult spot to
be, especially if you are a
candidate running
for Congress in one of these
districts like
Tom Davis did, suburban, where
you have a
lot of voters who are
independent, maybe are
Republican by nature, but
feeling very alienated
by the party at this point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tamara, first
I guess your
impressions on the debate.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, so it was a
tough debate.
It was rough.
It was hard to watch.
It was -- I got messages from
lots of people
saying, oh, my gosh, I have a
pit in my stomach
watching this.
In the end, you know, Donald
Trump went nuclear.
He really did.
He brought out the big thing
that he said
he had been threatening to bring
out for a
long time.
And I don't know that it
materially changed
the state of the race.
It certainly excites his base,
but it's not
clear that it was any sort of a
knockout blow
against Hillary Clinton.
She, you know, today, at her
rally said, how
about that debate, and got the
biggest applause
of the day again.
So, for people who support her,
she did a
fine job, and they were happy
with it.
And in terms of broadening the
ways, Donald
Trump appealed to his base, but
I don't know
that he appealed to people who
were looking,
trying to figure out what to do
in this election.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
There is a lot of talk about, is
the floor
going to drop out on Donald
Trump?
Donald Trump has never had a
floor problem.
The people who are with him are
always going
to be with him.
Let's say that is 35, 40 percent
of the electorate.
His problem is a ceiling
problem.
And he has never been able to
expand it very
high, in part because he keeps
going back
and talking to the people who
make up his
floor, instead of trying to go
to the people
who can expand his ceiling.
And that scorched earth campaign
that he ran
yesterday at the debate to me
suggests that
that's the kind of thing we're
going to see
for the next 30 days, which
means there is
no reaching out, there is no
broadening, there's
no pivoting.
This is all about, can I get
those people
who love me, who come to my
rallies to continue
to support me at the same rate?
That's, though, not a winning
coalition.
It's a coalition, though, that
he likes to
spend time with.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's also one
of the first
times that we have had a
candidate essentially
threaten to throw the other one
in jail if
he wins.
AMY WALTER: Yes, I mean, we have
never seen
anything quite like that.
And his campaign will say, well,
it wasn't
actually -- he quipped about it.
But the fact of the matter is,
he said, I'm
going to -- first of all, I'm
going to have
this -- the Justice Department
appoint a special
prosecutor to investigate
somebody who lost
a campaign.
And then, as an aside, he said,
well, if I
were president, you would be in
jail.
That is not something that
anybody has ever
seen before.
And I think, again, to the
voters who are
looking to see could they
picture Donald Trump
as president, where their number
one concern,
at least that I hear from a lot
of these especially
women voters, worried about his
temperament,
that is the sorts of thing that
keeps them
-- you know, keeps pushing them
away.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tamara, did
Hillary Clinton
reach out to any larger
audiences last night?
TAMARA KEITH: There was a little
of that.
And the campaign is continuing
that today.
Certainly, she delivered her
stronger together
message, which is, of course,
the theme of
her campaign.
But that is a message that is
intended to
reach people who aren't just
deep blue Democrats.
And, today, her campaign is out
with four
ads that will be running in
swing states that
feature Republicans talking
about why they're
voting for her and not Donald
for Trump.
And she's really presenting this
as a choice
of saying, voters know who
Donald Trump is,
but the way we vote will be --
will say who
we are, is the message that
she's delivering.
That is a message that's aimed
at Republicans
and independents, and certainly
not just die-hard
Democrats.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Tamara Keith,
Amy Walter, thanks so much.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome,
Hari.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And our
analysis and fact-checking
continues on our Web site, where
you can find
the top five debate takeaways
from our politics
team.
We turn now to the ongoing civil
war in Yemen,
where the civilian death toll
grew over the
weekend.
More than 140 people died after
what witnesses
say was an airstrike on a
funeral Saturday
in the capital city of Sanaa.
The Saudi air force has been
bombing the country
for months, with logistical
assistance from
the U.S. Reports from the scene
said it was
U.S.-made bombs that were
dropped on the funeral.
The Saudi-backed government in
Yemen is fighting
Houthi rebels, as well as
al-Qaida forces.
At least 10,000 people have died
over the
last 18 months, and more than
million have
been displaced.
And on Sunday, a U.S. Navy
guided missile
destroyer in the Red Sea was
targeted by Houthi
missiles fired from the Yemeni
coast.
The Navy says the missiles
detonated short
of the target, leaving the ship
untouched.
We begin with this report from
Neil Connery
of Independent Television News.
NEIL CONNERY: They're burying
the dead in
Sanaa, dozens of burials for
those killed
in this weekend's funeral
attack.
On the streets, thousands came
to mourn the
capital's governor, his picture
looking down
on his own procession.
The governor was one of hundreds
of people
packed into the funeral hall
when it was hit
by a Saudi-led coalition
airstrike.
But even as they pay their
respects to the
governor's family, the jets are
back again,
their roar heard overhead.
As Sanaa buries its dead, there
is rising
anger at the weekend funeral
attack, and,
with it, calls for revenge.
Hopes for peace here have never
seemed so
far away.
MAN: It means to us war.
We need war.
We will kill or be killed.
That's for us, blood for blood,
and eye for
eye.
NEIL CONNERY: Yemen's tragedy
has a new chapter,
the single deadliest attack in
its 19-month
war.
In the capital, as they cover
the graves of
its victims, how many more will
follow?
HARI SREENIVASAN: And to Jeffrey
Brown.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yesterday,
Secretary of State
Kerry spoke with Saudi officials
and called
for an immediate cessation of
hostilities.
And a National Security Council
spokesman
said that the U.S. would review
its support
of the Saudi-led coalition.
For more on the situation, I'm
joined by Michael
Hanna, a senior fellow at the
Century Foundation.
Welcome to you.
There was already so much
concern and anger
over civilian casualties and
deaths in this
conflict.
How important is this new
incident?
MICHAEL HANNA, Senior Fellow,
Century Foundation:
Well, it's gotten a lot more
attention than
this war usually does.
And I think that's partly
because of the nature
of this attack and the scope of
the damage.
This was a really horrific
attack.
It happened on a funeral hall
with a huge
number of senior Yemeni figures,
tribal figures
and political leaders.
And it does seem like a
difference in time,
like a red line had been crossed
in bombing
this kind of funeral gathering.
And for that reason, it's gotten
a lot of
attention and a lot of negative
attention.
And the reaction of the United
States has
been different.
We have seen horrific bombings
in the past,
but this has elicited a
different kind of
response from the United States.
JEFFREY BROWN: Before we get to
that, just
remind us briefly where things
stand in this
conflict in Yemen.
And what's behind the Saudi-led
bombing?
MICHAEL HANNA: Well, the Saudi
military campaign
began in March of 2015, so it's
been going
on about a year-and-a-half.
And, of course, Yemen and Saudi
are border
countries, so Saudi has looked
at Yemen differently
than it does at other conflicts,
say, Syria,
for example.
That being said, it is quite
different to
see Saudi Arabia engaged in
direct military
conflict.
They began a military campaign
about a year-and-a-half
ago.
They were joined by other Gulf
states.
And, of course, they are getting
support from
the United States and the United
Kingdom.
And so this is a difference in
kind.
I think Saudi Arabia sees the
region changing.
It's quite concerned about the
influence of
Iran.
It sees in the Houthis, the
rebel movement
that essentially overthrew the
government
in Yemen, as a kind of extension
of Iranian
influence, as a proxy force.
And while the United States has
a differing
view of the conflict, doesn't
necessarily
agree about the Saudi analysis
of the conflict,
it has clearly reached a point
for Saudi Arabia
in its own calculations that
enough is enough.
And some of this is about
establishing deterrent
capacity and trying to change
the kind of
regional balance of power at the
moment.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so, to the
extent the
U.S. has supported this Saudi
effort, and
yet there have been many
strains, particularly
over casualties among civilians.
What now?
When they talk about a review,
what do you
see happening?
MICHAEL HANNA: Well, I think
it's high time
that there is a review.
The statement by the NSC this
weekend suggested
that U.S. security operation is
not a blank
check.
And I think, for a long time
now, the United
States has hoped that the Saudis
and others
would essentially declare
victory and focus
on a political settlement.
And I think that's still the
American position.
And that has been voiced
publicly and privately.
But I do think this seems
different, that
the United States, because of
this latest
incident, is going to be much
more keen in
bringing about a cessation of
hostilities,
and much more keen on focusing
on the diplomatic
track, which has sputtered on
through various
iterations, but has failed to
have any kind
of lasting impact.
But I think the United States
has a very different
view about the utility -- the
continuing utility
of this military campaign and
the prospects
for it to be particularly
successful in the
coming months.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Michael Hanna, thank
you very much.
MICHAEL HANNA: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Earlier in the
program,
we told you about the
record-breaking flooding
in North Carolina.
Hurricane Matthew also left a
wake of damage
on its way to North Carolina
along the coasts
of three states.
Billed as the oldest city in
America, St.
Augustine, Florida, was one of
the places
that felt the storm's might.
The small coastal town of nearly
14,000, which
dates back to the 16th century,
is only now
emerging from this weekend's
storm.
I was there yesterday.
It looked like one big garage
sale on Solana
Road in St. Augustine, Florida.
But everything in the front
yards was contaminated,
couches, mattresses, family
keepsakes all
soaked by the floods after
Hurricane Matthew.
Families were racing to get it
all out before
the moisture turned to mold and
made its way
into the walls.
NANCY SHAVER, Mayor of St.
Augustine, Florida:
When you evacuate, you take only
the things
that you really find
irreplaceable.
But this is the whole -- these
are all the
things that may be replaceable,
but they're
what give you something to come
home to.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mayor Nancy
Shaver took
us to one of the low-lying areas
that was
hardest-hit.
The sewer pumps were still
offline, meaning
underground waste was
overflowing onto the
street.
Residents were only allowed back
into the
area Saturday.
NANCY SHAVER: Your home is where
you're supposed
to go to be peaceful, restful,
be with your
family, sleep, eat.
And none of these things are
possible in these
homes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
homeowners on
this block, the city manager,
John Regan.
What did you have to throw out?
JOHN REGAN, City Manager, St.
Augustine, Florida:
Everything.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How many feet
of water?
JOHN REGAN: My house was two
feet of water.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tasked with
coordinating
the city's recovery effort, now
working furiously
on his own.
JOHN REGAN: And these houses are
at this level
of destruction.
HARI SREENIVASAN: While trying
to salvage
what he could from his home, he
was also trying
to prevent more fires like the
ones the city
has been fighting every night
since the storm.
JOHN REGAN: So, and all these
houses that
have been flooded, when we bring
the power
back, you got to be sensitive
that there's
no short-circuiting.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Regan is
luckier than some
just up the coast, who will
never move back
into their homes again.
The storm's waves gouged deep
beneath the
foundations of some homes, and
surge-driven
waters lifted and washed away
everything they
could.
The debris is not limited to the
coastline,
but inlets as well.
Marinas usually full of tourists
and boaters
are shut down because floating
junk is a danger
to boats and several docks have
lost their
moorings.
BILL HUNSICKER, Charter Boat
Captain: We're
ready to go fishing, but, at
this point, this
marina, we can't get our boats
back in here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Bill Hunsicker
captains
a charter boat for sport
fishermen.
He says he can last two weeks
without customers
before he has to make tough
decisions.
In the city's historic Old Town,
most businesses
remained shuttered, as they
dried out and
cleaned up.
WOMAN: This is the oldest bar in
the oldest
city.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The local
watering hole
that rarely closes stopped for
Matthew.
WOMAN: Usually, we have a
hurricane party,
but, this year, we didn't have
any power.
So...
WOMAN: And it was a really bad
one.
Nobody wanted to be here.
JORGE RIVERA, Blogger: So, this
is where the
bulk of the water came.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Blogger Jorge
Rivera wanted
to stay and track the storm.
JORGE RIVERA: The water's up to
my waist.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He captured
some of the
earliest scenes of Matthew's
arrival.
Over the weekend, he continued
to document
its toll.
JORGE RIVERA: This was scary,
because it's
not so much that the hurricane
is powerful.
It's that you're in such a
vulnerable place.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now he wonders
whether it
would have been worth it.
JORGE RIVERA: The question is,
once they find
your body, they say, was he a
fool or was
he brave?
So, I don't know.
I don't have an answer for that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But Rivera
wasn't alone.
Mayor Shaver says almost half
the city stayed
behind, many who didn't have the
means to
evacuate and others who were
homeless and
out of reach, numbers she hopes
to change
in the future.
How do you build in resilience
to face something
like this?
NANCY SHAVER: Well, this is a --
we have had
450 years of practice.
We are an extraordinarily
resilient city.
It's a real community.
It has a very rich fabric of
reaching out,
connecting and helping folks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That sentiment
moved the
owners of Le Macaron to hand out
sweets to
their local firefighters.
Recent transplants from France,
they're overwhelmed
by the support
STEPHANE JUSKOWIAK, Le Macaron:
Here, we see
this, and it's -- we don't have
this in Europe,
in France.
I'm sorry to say that, but,
here, it's very
different.
And we -- there was lots of
people coming
every 15 minutes, saying, hey,
we can help
us.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This city has
soldiered
on through challenges for more
than 400 years.
City hall, which was flooded,
reopened to
essential personnel today.
Online, a poet shares her
experience of hurricane
destruction and recovery.
Find that at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Next: combining sustainable
agriculture with
entrepreneurship in developing
countries.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro reports
from EARTH University, a campus
in Costa Rica
that aims to do just that.
His story is part of our Agents
for Change
series.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It is quite
likely the
only university in the world
where traffic
stops for bananas, millions of
them wrapped
tightly in blue plastic.
EARTH University actually was a
commercial
banana plantation before being
converted in
1992 to a school to train
students from developing
countries grappling with climate
change and
growing populations.
Funds came from the U.S. and
Costa Rican governments
and the Michigan-based Kellogg
Foundation.
JOSE ZAGLUL, Co-Founder, EARTH
University:
When we first came to this
property, the whole
river was contaminated with the
blue plastic
bag that also have chemical
inside to protect
it, to protect it from insects.
And when the first group of
students came,
we brought them here and we
started to pick
all the plastic.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Today,
university co-founder
Jose Zaglul says the blue
plastic bags are
recycled and tons of plant
waste, stalks,
fruit that don't make the grade.
Things that used to be discarded
are collected
and fed to livestock.
JOSE ZAGLUL: Now we don't use
chemicals in
the bags.
And we also are using an organic
fungicide.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: These
bananas are labeled
as responsibly grown and sold
across the U.S.
in Whole Foods stores.
The enterprise supports dozens
of local jobs
and scholarships.
JOSE ZAGLUL: That girl over
there, she's from
Panama.
This guy is from Brazil.
I think she is from Ecuador.
That guy you see, he's from
Somaliland in
Africa.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Forty-three
countries
are represented here.
A majority of the 400 students
depend on financial
aid.
From 1,600 applications, about
110 are admitted
each year.
JOSE ZAGLUL: What we attempt to
discover there
is their interest to go back to
their countries,
because we are about forming
leaders and individuals
that really overcome barriers.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Yves
Rusanganwa is a first-year
student from Rwanda born soon
after that country's
genocide.
YVES RUSANGANWA, EARTH
University: I grew
up hearing about hunger, hearing
about poverty,
hearing epidemic diseases.
I grew up in that environment.
So, as I was growing up, I grew
up a passion
inside of me of doing something
in this world
and try to change that history.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Many
students say a lack
of knowledge hinders
productivity and keeps
most farmers in their homelands
in poverty.
Devotha Tumushimiyimana is also
from Rwanda,
a nation the size of Maryland
with a population
of 11 million.
DEVOTHA TUMUSHIMIYIMANA, EARTH
University:
My country is a small country.
So, I would like also to teach
people how
they can use -- I mean, how they
can do agriculture
in small land.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Jose Zaglul
says doing
agriculture on small land, or
even no land,
is an important part of the
curriculum.
JOSE ZAGLUL: At home, in the
schools, in rooftops
in the cities, and you don't
have to utilize
so much energy and fossil fuels
to transport
them.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Across
campus, fruits
and vegetables are grown in
unlikely containers,
with unlikely tools.
JOSE ZAGLUL: All the bottles,
you can fill
them with water, with -- and
then it's like
drip irrigation.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The campus
tries to model
the ideal carbon-neutral world
it wants its
graduates to help create.
Zaglul says that's sometimes
involved taking
risks, like the decision at the
start to keep
producing bananas.
JOSE ZAGLUL: It used to cost us
25 cents more
per box to do all the
sustainable practices.
And nobody would pay us for
that.
I tell you, we were losing
money, but we had
to show the students that it is
possible to
do sustainable business.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Possible, he
says, because,
over time, recycling and not
using pesticides
save money.
Then came the right large
customer, Whole
Foods.
Besides the classroom and field
emphasis on
sustainable practices, students
are encouraged
to develop business ideas.
Twenty-three-year-old Diderot
Saintilma has
plans for when he returns to his
native Haiti.
DIDEROT SAINTILMA, EARTH
University (through
translator): Where I come from,
there are
a lot of peanut farmers.
They don't do very much
post-harvest processing.
So I would like to start an
association or
cooperative of small peanut
farmers, so they
can get added value for
products.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Many
graduates have taken
ideas from here to the business
world.
For Costa Rican Joaquin Viquez,
it was animal
waste recycling.
Solids are separated to make
fertilizer, while
large bladders or bio-digesters
break down
liquid wastes to capture
methane, or biogas.
JOAQUIN VIQUEZ, EARTH University
Graduate:
This is like five times thinner
than what
we use now.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Its not new
technology,
he says.
It simply wasn't commercialized
for farms
in developing countries.
JOAQUIN VIQUEZ: There was no one
you could
call or no store you could go
and say, hey,
I want a digester.
And so we made it technically
accessible and
we do a lot of efforts to make
it economically
feasible for a farmer.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: On this day,
they were
installing a digester at the
Calderon family
farm, about 100 head of dairy
and beef cows.
MARIA AGUILLAR CALDERON, Farmer
(through translator):
I took a course recently at the
National Institute
of Learning, and they talked
about global
warming and hygiene.
And I really came back wanting
to have a clean
farm.
So, I contacted a microfinance
agency, talked
to my husband and used our
savings to do this.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Viquez says
not only will
this family be reducing
greenhouse gases emitted
by unprocessed animal wastes,
but their energy
savings over time will more than
cover the
digester's $3,400 cost.
JOAQUIN VIQUEZ: They're not
going to have
to use any firewood or propane
for the cooking.
And I know they're going to have
surplus.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Viquez is
one of about
2,000 EARTH University alumni.
Jose Zaglul says each on average
has created
four other jobs, and their
influence has spread
in other ways.
Many commercial banana
producers, he says,
have adopted practices that
began here.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in Guapiles, Costa Rica.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fred's
reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at the
University of St. Thomas in
Minnesota.
Ruth Bader Ginsburg broke
countless barriers
for women in the legal
profession long before
she was tapped by President Bill
Clinton for
the highest court in the land.
Now she has published a
collection of her
writings and speeches called "My
Own Words."
For this latest addition to the
"NewsHour"
Bookshelf, Gwen Ifill sat down
with Justice
Ginsburg recently at the Supreme
Court.
GWEN IFILL: Justice Ginsburg,
thank you for
speaking with us.
I want to start by -- with a
broader question
than you even address in your
book, which
is, you have become something of
a folk hero
to some women.
Did you see that coming?
RUTH BADER GINSBURG, Associate
Justice, U.S.
Supreme Court: It is utterly
amazing.
Of course I didn't see it
coming.
And it was all the creation of a
second-year
student, second-year law
student, at NYU.
It came about this way.
She was reading a court's
decision that invalidated
a very significant part of the
Voting Rights
Act of 1965.
And she was angry.
And then she remembered that I
had said anger
is a useless emotion.
It doesn't get you any place.
Do something positive.
So, she created this tumbler
starting with
my dissent, and then it took off
into the
wild blue yonder.
GWEN IFILL: You know, some
people would say
it's about politics, but I
wonder if it's
not also about your presence,
your very existence
on the court and the way that
you write and
the way that you sometimes take
on your colleagues.
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: I would
like to think
so, but I certainly was given a
tremendous
boost into the public arena by
the Notorious
R.B.G.
When I was asked about it, I
said, well, it's
exactly right, because Notorious
B.I.G. and
I had something in common?
You did?
What?
We were both born and bred in
Brooklyn, New
York.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: You ever consider
being a rapper?
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: I don't
think I have
that talent.
GWEN IFILL: Well, neither do I.
I want to talk to you about
someone you give
a lot of credit to in this book.
And that is your late husband,
Marty Ginsburg.
And one of the things that
someone said is
that you would never have been
on the court
without him.
Do you agree with that?
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: It's
absolutely true.
One of my law clerks at the
Court of Appeals
said at the time that Clinton
was considering
who would be his first nominee
to the court,
he said, "You will be on the
list, but you
will be probably be around
number 25, unless
you do something to promote
yourself."
So, I'm not very good at
promotion, but Marty
was.
And he was tireless in his
effort to see that
I would be the nominee.
GWEN IFILL: Just the way you
write about,
speak about Marty, it's almost
like a present
tense presence in your life.
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: He will be
present in
my life as long as I live.
I have his portrait in my
bedroom.
And I look at it and say, "You
would probably
like what I am doing now."
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Out of all the
speeches and the
writings that you have collected
in this book,
what do you get the most
frequent questions
about?
What do young people, older
people ask you?
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: One
question is, did
you always want to be a judge,
or, more exorbitantly,
did you always want to be a
Supreme Court
justice?
I try to explain the way things
were in the
not-so-good-old-days.
So, when I graduated from law
school in 1959,
there wasn't a single woman on
any federal
bench.
It wouldn't be a realistic
ambition for a
woman to want to become a
federal judge.
It wasn't realistic until Jimmy
Carter became
our president.
He looked around at the federal
judiciary
and said: That's nice, but they
all look like
me.
So, I am determined to appoint
members of
minority groups and women in
numbers to the
federal bench, so we will use
the talent of
all of the people of the United
States, and
not just some of them.
GWEN IFILL: I'm not sure
everyone knows how
extensive your interest in
women's issues,
women's rights were long before
you got to
the court.
Is that something which this can
also begin
to illuminate?
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: Yes.
The book includes one of my many
speeches
about why we need an equal
rights amendment.
GWEN IFILL: Do you feel that --
as a liberal,
that conservative women, men can
identify
with you as well?
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: The label
liberal or
conservative, any -- every time
I hear that,
I think of the great Gilbert and
Sullivan
song from "Iolanthe."
It goes, every gal and every boy
that's born
alive is either a little liberal
or else a
little conservative.
What do those labels mean?
It depends on whose ox is being
gored.
GWEN IFILL: You got into a
little trouble
for making a comment about
Donald Trump this
year.
Do you still regret it?
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: I said what
I had to
say about that, and I will not
address that
subject again.
GWEN IFILL: That's fair.
Let me ask you another question
about what's
happening right now.
Do you know Merrick Garland?
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: Yes, I know
Merrick quite,
quite well.
He is now the chief judge of the
court on
which I served for many years.
And he's an expert in
administrative law.
So, I have read his writings.
I wish that the spirit that
prevailed in 1993,
when I was nominated, I wish
that that could
be restored.
In 1993, the vote on me was 96
to 3.
I was nominated on June 14.
I was confirmed on August 3.
GWEN IFILL: It's very different
now.
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: Yes.
But there was a true bipartisan
spirit prevailing.
Democrat and Republicans worked
together,
and they got things done.
GWEN IFILL: Everybody wonders
whether you're
going to be ever done.
You have moved the bar many
different times.
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: Yes.
At first, I said I wanted to
stay as long
as Justice Brandeis did.
He was appointed at the same age
I was, 60.
But he retired when he was 83,
which I am.
So, my answer is, I will do this
job as long
as I can do it full-steam.
And, at my age, that means you
take it year
by year, though I am confident
that, this
year, there will be no slowdown.
What will be next year?
I don't know.
GWEN IFILL: None of us really
knows, but we
will be watching.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg,
thank you very
much.
RUTH BADER GINSBURG: It was a
pleasure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online:
Sixty-nine years ago tonight, a
brand-new
Rodgers and Hammerstein musical
about an ambitious
doctor debuted on Broadway, and
it was a huge
flop.
But that doesn't stop medical
historian Howard
Markel from recommending the
play for its
important life lessons.
Plus, we have shared exclusive
Snapchat and
Instagram stories about seven
bee species
in Hawaii recently added to the
endangered
species list.
Follow us @PBSNews on Snapchat
and "NewsHour"
on Instagram.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, we will head to
Greece, a country
grappling with letting refugee
children into
school.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.